NLP Project Proposal:

Newspapers and online publications are often politically biased and reflect the political leaning of their publisher. Changes to the way the public consumes news media have exasperated these biases and more than ever people are consuming news from non-traditional sources. American politics have become more polarizing as well and many draw on sources which lean to their preferred political ideology.

In light of the ongoing election cycle and the ramping up of politically slanted news content,our group seeks to provide news readers with tools that promote balanced news consuption. Our primary objective is to develop a natural language processing pipeline to detect political bias in news articles. Our far-reaching objective is to design techniques for debiasing the identified partiality and providing summarization of news articles based on unbiased language. 

To address this question, we will use the Newspaper Bias Dataset (NewB) created by Jerry Wei and an Article-Bias-Prediction dataset created from allsides.com by Ramy Baly. The NewB dataset contains 200,000+ Sentences about Donald Trump labeled by news source (11 sources) and political bias (Conservative vs Liberal). The Article-Bias-Prediction dataset contains a total of 37,554 articles labelled by source and political bias (Left, Center, Right).

To achieve our primary objective, our group will employ both a classical model and an advanced neural network model and compare their performance in bias detection. The classical model will be either a Naïve Bayes or Logistic Regression model to classify articles based on their bias. This will be evaluated using F1 score to determine the performance of the model.

After an article is classified as biased, our next objective will be to generate a summary of the news article based on bias-free language. The metric to evaluate this model will be determined when the exact neural network model is determined. 


A rough schedule to complete this project is as follows:
Week 1: Data ingestion, cleaning, and classification model development(Classical and NN).
Week 2: Optimization of the Classification model.
Week 3: Development and optimization of generative model for debiased summarization.
Week: Finalize project and streatmlit presentation.


Datasets:
https://github.com/JerryWeiAI/NewB
https://github.com/ramybaly/Article-Bias-Prediction/tree/main
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.03051v2.pdf
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2010.05338.pdf

https://newsapi.org/
